=head1 NAME

remctl - Remote execution tool

=head1 SYNOPSIS

remctl [B<-s> I<remctld-service-principal>] [B<-v> I<verbose>] I<host>
I<type> I<service> [I<parameters> ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<remctl> is a program that allows a user to execute commands remotely on a 
server that is running the remctld deamon. B<remctl> does not interpret the 
commands given to it, it passes them to the server and displays the return
message. The commands must be defined on the server-side before a B<remctl>
client can execute them, and the user running B<remctl> must be authorized
to execute the particular command on the server.

Access to remote commands is authenticated via GSSAPI Kerberos V, so a user
must have a ticket granting ticket to use B<remctl>. All transmissions to
and from the remctld server are encrypted using Kerberos. 

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item B<-s> I<remctld-service-principal>

This option is used to specify the Kerberos service principal that remctld 
runs as, if it's not the default principal. By default it is the server host 
principal: "host/<machinename>.stanford.edu".

=item B<-v> I<verbose>

Turn on extra printouts of the client-server interaction.

=item I<host>

The hostname of the target server.

=item I<type>

The type of command being requested, such as "afs" for the afs volume backend.
In sysctl terms, the "ss" in "ss:create".

=item I<service>

The service within the type being requested, such as "release" for the afs 
volume backend. In sysctl terms, the "create" in "ss:create".

=item I<parameters>

The command line arguments passed to the specific command being requested.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Release an afs volume called ls.tripwire:

    % remctl lsdb afs release ls.tripwire

=head1 SEE ALSO

remctld(1), kerberos(1), kinit(1)

=head1 AUTHOR

Anton Ushakov <antonu@stanford.edu>

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright 2002, 2003 Board of Trustees, Leland Stanford Jr. University.
  
All rights reserved.
  
Export of this software from the United States of America may require a
specific license from the United States Government.  It is the
responsibility of any person or organization contemplating export to
obtain such a license before exporting.

WITHIN THAT CONSTRAINT, permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute
this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is
hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all
copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice
appear in supporting documentation, and that the name of Stanford
University not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to
distribution of the software without specific, written prior permission.
Stanford University makes no representations about the suitability of this
software for any purpose.  It is provided "as is" without express or
implied warranty.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=cut
