=head1 NAME

remctld - Server for remctl, a remote command execution utility

=head1 SYNOPSIS

remctld [B<-dhmv>] [B<-f> I<config>] [B<-P> I<file>] [B<-p> I<port>]
[B<-s> I<service>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<remctld> is the server for remctl.  It accepts a connection from remctl,
receives the command to execute and the arguments, verifies authorization
of the user and executes the command, returning the result back to the
client.  All connections are authenticated using GSS-API Kerberos v5, and
all transmissions are also encrypted using the GSS-API privacy layer.

B<remctld> is normally started using B<tcpserver> or from B<inetd>, but it
may be run in stand-alone mode as a daemon using B<-m>.  Either B<-s> must
be given to use an alternate identity (which will require the same flag be
used for B<remctl> client invocations), or it must be run as root to read
the host keytab file.  B<remctld> logs its activity using syslog (the
daemon facility).

The location of the configuration file may be specified with the B<-f>
option.  The default location is F<@sysconfdir@/remctl.conf>.  For
information on the format of the configuration file, see L<"CONFIGURATION
FILE"> below.

When the command is run, several environment variables will be set
providing information about the remote connection.  See L<ENVIRONMENT>
below for more information.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-d>

Enable verbose debug logging to syslog (or to standard output if B<-S> is
also given).

=item B<-f> I<config>

The configuration file for B<remctld>, overriding the default path.

=item B<-h>

Show a brief usage message and then exit.

=item B<-m>

Enable stand-alone mode.  B<remctld> will listen to its configured port,
4444 by default, and handle incoming connections one at a time.  This is
mostly useful for debugging purposes.

=item B<-P> I<file>

When running in stand-alone mode (B<-m>), write the PID of B<remctld> to
I<file>.  This option is ignored unless B<-m> is also given.

=item B<-p> I<port>

When running in stand-alone mode, Listen on port I<port> rather than 4444,
the default.  This option does nothing unless used with B<-m>.

=item B<-S>

Rather than logging to syslog, log debug and routine connection messages
to standard output and error messages to standard error.  This option is
mostly useful for testing and debugging.

=item B<-s> I<service>

This option is used to specify the Kerberos service principal for
B<remctld> to run as, the default is the server host principal:
"host/<machinename>.stanford.edu"

=item B<-v>

Print the version of B<remctld> and exit.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILE

The configuration file defines the allowed commands and specifies access
control information.  The configuration file format is lines of space- or
tab-separated strings, where each line is:

    type service executable [logmask=n[,...]] {aclfile}+

Blank lines and lines beginning with C<#> are ignored.  Lines can be
continued on the next line by ending them with a backslash (C<\>).  Be
aware that comments can be continued with a backslash as well.

As a special case, a line like:

    include file

will include I<file> as if its contents were pasted verbatim into the
configuration file at that point.  I<file> may be a directory, in which
case all files whose names do not contain a period found in that directory
will be included (in no particular order).  I<file> should be a fully
qualified path.

The meaning of these fields is:

=over 4

=item I<type>

The type of the command being requested, such as "afs" for the afs volume 
backend.  This is used to group commands together into a class and allows
all commands in the same class to be passed to the same backend program.

=item I<service>

The service within the type being requested, such as "release" for the afs
volume backend.  The keyword ALL may be used instead of the service to
specify an executable and aclfiles for the entire type in one line.  The
service is always passed as the first argument to the executable program
that is listed for that service.

=item I<executable>

The full path to the commmand executable to run for this type-service 
combination.  (See examples below.)

=item I<logmask=n[,...]>

Limit logging of command arguments.  Any argument listed in the logmask
list will have its value logged as "**MASKED**".  This is to avoid logging
the arguments of commands that take privileged information.

For example, if the command is C<admin passwd {username} {passwd}>, then
you'd want to set logmask to C<3>, so the password argument gets logged as
C<**MASKED**>.

=item I<aclfile>

The full paths of one or more access control files, each containing one 
Kerberos v5 principal per line, such as C<username@stanford.edu>.  Blank
lines and lines beginning with C<#> are ignored in the ACL files.  As a
special case, a line like:

    include file

in an ACL file includes other ACL files and is handled identically to the
include directive in configuration files.

The keyword ANYUSER may be used instead of the aclfiles to allow access to
all users.  Note the user still needs to authenticate to B<remctld>, this
only affects authorization.  This can be used for backend programs that
want to check ACLs themselves and will retrieve the authenticated
principal from the REMOTE_USER environment variable.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables will be set for any commands run via
B<remctld>:

=over 4

=item REMOTE_USER

=item REMUSER

Set to the Kerberos principal of the authenticated client.  REMUSER has
always been set by B<remctld>; REMOTE_USER is also set (to the same value)
starting with remctl 2.1.

=item REMOTE_ADDR

The IP address of the remote host.  Currently, this is always an IPv4
address, but in the future it may be set to an IPv6 address.  This
environment variable was added in remctl 2.1.

=item REMOTE_HOST

The hostname of the remote host, if it was available.  If reverse name
resolution failed, this environment variable will not be set.  This
variable was added in remctl 2.1.

=back

B<remctld> also used to set SCPRINCIPAL for (partial) backward
compatibility with B<sysctld>, but stopped doing so as of remctl 2.1.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Typically B<remctld> is to be started as follows, where "hostname" is the
machine where remctld will run, and 4444 is the port:

    tcpserver hostname 4444 remctld

The equivalent line for F</etc/inetd.conf> is:

    4444 stream tcp nowait root /usr/sbin/tcpd /usr/sbin/remctld

Example configuration file:

 # Comments can be used like this.
 accounts create /usr/local/bin/doaccount  /etc/acl/group1 \
     /etc/acl/group2
 accounts delete /usr/local/bin/doaccount  /etc/acl/group3
 accounts view   /usr/local/bin/doaccount  ANYUSER
 accounts passwd /usr/local/bin/dopasswd   logmask=3 /etc/acl/group1
 printing ALL    /usr/local/bin/printthing /etc/acl/group2 

The commands C<accounts create>, C<accounts delete>, and so forth will all
be passed to /usr/local/bin/doaccount with the first argument being the
specific subcommand, with the exception of C<accounts passwd>.  That
command will be passed to /usr/local/bin/dopasswd instead, but it will
still get C<passwd> as its first argument.  The third argument to
C<accounts passwd> (presumably the password) will not be logged to syslog.
All commands starting with C<printing> will be passed to
/usr/local/bin/printthing.

=head1 NOTES

When using Heimdal with triple-DES keys and talking to old clients that
only speak version one of the remctl protocol, B<remctld> may have
problems with MIC verification.  This doesn't affect new clients and
servers since the version two protocol doesn't use MICs.  If you are using
Heimdal and run into MIC verification problems, see the COMPATIBILITY
section of gssapi(3).

=head1 SEE ALSO

remctl(1), syslog(3), tcpserver(1)

The current version of this program is available from its web page at
L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/remctl/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Anton Ushakov <antonu@stanford.edu> is the original author.  Updates and
current maintenance are done by Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 Board of Trustees, Leland Stanford
Jr. University.  All rights reserved.
  
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided
that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
documentation, and that the name of Stanford University not be used in
advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software
without specific, written prior permission.  Stanford University makes no
representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose.
It is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=cut
