=for stopwords
remctl API Allbery timeout

=head1 NAME

remctl_set_timeout - Set timeout for subsequent remctl client operations

=head1 SYNOPSIS

#include <remctl.h>

int B<remctl_set_timeout>(struct remctl *I<r>, time_t I<timeout>);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

remctl_set_timeout() sets the timeout for connections and commands to
I<timeout>, which should be an integer number of seconds.  I<timeout> may
be 0 to clear a timeout that was previously set and restore the default
behavior of having no timeout.  All subsequent operations on the given
struct remctl argument will be subject to this timeout, including
remctl_open() if called prior to calling remctl_open().

The timeout is a timeout on network activity from the server, not on a
complete operation.  So, for example, a timeout of ten seconds just
requires that the server send some data every ten seconds.  If the server
sends only tiny amounts of data at a time, the complete operation could
take much longer than ten seconds without triggering the timeout.

=head1 RETURN VALUE

remctl_set_timeout() returns true on success and false on failure.  The
only failure case is if I<timeout> is negative.  On failure, the caller
should call remctl_error() to retrieve the error message.

=head1 SEE ALSO

remctl_new(3), remctl_command(3), remctl_open(3), remctl_output(3),
remctl_error(3)

The current version of the remctl library and complete details of the
remctl protocol are available from its web page at
L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/remctl/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>

=cut
