=for stopwords
remctl const API Allbery

=head1 NAME

remctl_error - Retrieve the error from a failed remctl operation

=head1 SYNOPSIS

#include <remctl.h>

const char *B<remctl_error>(struct remctl *I<r>);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

remctl_error() returns the error from a previously failed remctl
operation.  Its only argument is a remctl struct as returned by
remctl_new().  If the previous remctl operation was successful, returns
the constant string "No error".

The caller may not modify the returned string.  The string may even be
stored in read-only memory and attempting to modify it may cause a memory
fault.  The returned pointer will be invalidated by the next call to any
remctl API function with the same client object, other than
remctl_error().

=head1 RETURN VALUE

remctl_error() returns either the previous error or the constant string
"No error".  It will never return NULL.

=head1 COMPATIBILITY

This interface has been provided by the remctl client library since its
initial release in version 2.0.

=head1 AUTHOR

Russ Allbery <eagle@eyrie.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright 2007, 2009, 2014 The Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford
Junior University

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification, are
permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and
this notice are preserved.  This file is offered as-is, without any
warranty.
  
=head1 SEE ALSO

remctl_new(3), remctl_open(3), remctl_command(3), remctl_commandv(3),
remctl_output(3)

The current version of the remctl library and complete details of the
remctl protocol are available from its web page at
L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/remctl/>.

=cut
