=for stopwords
remctl API Allbery const ccache GSS-API KRB5CCNAME

=head1 NAME

remctl_set_ccache - Set credential cache for remctl client connections

=head1 SYNOPSIS

#include <remctl.h>

int B<remctl_set_ccache>(struct remctl *I<r>, const char *I<ccache>);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

remctl_set_ccache() tells the the remctl client library to use I<ccache>
as the credential cache for authentication to a remctl server.  It will
affect any subsequent remctl_open() calls on the same struct remctl object
(and may have broader effects; see below).  I<ccache> is normally a path
to a file in the file system that holds Kerberos credentials, but may take
other values depending on the underlying Kerberos implementation used by
GSS-API.

Calling this function will normally override any KRB5CCNAME environment
setting.  If the caller wishes to honor that setting, it should either not
call this function or check whether that environment variable is set
first.

=head1 RETURN VALUE

remctl_set_ccache() returns true on success and false on failure.  On
failure, the caller should call remctl_error() to retrieve the error
message.

This function will always return failure if the underlying GSS-API
implementation against which the remctl client library was compiled does
not support setting the Kerberos credential cache.  The caller should be
prepared for that.  Falling back on setting the KRB5CCNAME environment
variable is often a reasonable choice.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Here's an example of attempting to use this function to set a ticket cache
location and falling back on setting KRB5CCNAME in the environment if this
function is not supported.

    struct remctl r;

    r = remctl_new();
    if (r != NULL)
        if (!remctl_set_ccache(r, "/tmp/krb5cc_example"))
            putenv("KRB5CCNAME=/tmp/krb5cc_example");

This assumes that any failure is due to lack of support from the
underlying library rather than some other cause.

=head1 WARNINGS

The effect of this function is only localized to this specific remctl
client context if the remctl client library was built against a Kerberos
as well as GSS-API library and the GSS-API library supported
gss_krb5_import_cred().  Otherwise, it falls back to calling
gss_krb5_ccache_name(), which sets the credential cache used by the
underlying GSS-API library for every GSS-API operation in the current
execution context (process or thread), not just for this remctl object or
even just for remctl operations.  This function may therefore change
global execution state and may affect other GSS-API operations done
elsewhere in the same process.

=head1 SEE ALSO

remctl_new(3), remctl_open(3), remctl_error(3)

The current version of the remctl library and complete details of the
remctl protocol are available from its web page at
L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/remctl/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Russ Allbery <eagle@eyrie.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright 2011, 2013 The Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior
University

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification, are
permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and
this notice are preserved.  This file is offered as-is, without any
warranty.
  
=cut
