=for stopwords
remctld remctl -dFhmSvZ keytab GSS-API tcpserver inetd subcommand AFS
backend logmask NUL acl ACL princ filename gput CMU GPUT xform ANYUSER IP
IPv4 IPv6 hostname SCPRINCIPAL sysctld Heimdal MICs Ushakov Allbery
subcommands REMUSER pcre PCRE triple-DES MERCHANTABILITY username arg
SIGCONT SIGSTOP systemd IANA-registered localgroup PKINIT anyuser
SPDX-License-Identifier FSFAP

=head1 NAME

remctld - Server for remctl, a remote command execution utility

=head1 SYNOPSIS

remctld [B<-dFhmSvZ>] [B<-b> I<bind-address> [B<-b> I<bind-address> ...]]
    [B<-f> I<config>] [B<-k> I<keytab>] [B<-P> I<file>] [B<-p> I<port>]
    [B<-s> I<service>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<remctld> is the server for remctl.  It accepts a connection from remctl,
receives the command to execute and the arguments, verifies authorization
of the user and executes the command, returning the result back to the
client.  All connections are authenticated using Kerberos GSS-API
Kerberos, and all transmissions are also encrypted using the GSS-API
privacy layer.

B<remctld> is normally started using B<tcpserver> or from B<inetd>, but it
may be run in stand-alone mode as a daemon using B<-m>.  Either B<-s> must
be given to use an alternate identity (which will require the same flag be
used for B<remctl> client invocations), or it must be run as root to read
the host keytab file.  B<remctld> logs its activity using syslog (the
daemon facility).

The location of the configuration file may be specified with the B<-f>
option.  The default location is F<@sysconfdir@/remctl.conf>.  For
information on the format of the configuration file, see L<"CONFIGURATION
FILE"> below.

When the command is run, several environment variables will be set
providing information about the remote connection.  See L<ENVIRONMENT>
below for more information.

Command-line and configuration options and ACL methods are annotated below
with the version at which they were added.  For version information for
more general features, see L<COMPATIBILITY> below.

=head1 OPTIONS

The start of each option description is annotated with the version of
B<remctld> in which that option was added with its current meaning.

=over 4

=item B<-b> I<bind-address>

[2.17] When running as a standalone server, bind to the specified local
address rather than listening on all interfaces.  This option may be given
multiple times to bind to multiple addresses.  I<bind-address> must be an
IP address (either IPv4 or IPv6), not a hostname.  Only makes sense in
combination with B<-m>.

This option is ignored if B<remctld> is passed already open sockets via
the systemd socket activation protocol.  In that case, the bind addresses
of the sockets should be controlled via the systemd configuration.

=item B<-d>

[1.10] Enable verbose debug logging to syslog (or to standard output if
B<-S> is also given).

=item B<-F>

[2.8] Normally when running in stand-alone mode (B<-m>), B<remctld>
backgrounds itself to run as a daemon, changes directory to F</>, and
drops any controlling terminal.  This flag suppresses this behavior,
usually for debugging or so that B<remctld> can be monitored by other
processes.

=item B<-f> I<config>

[1.0] The configuration file for B<remctld>, overriding the default path.

=item B<-h>

[1.10] Show a brief usage message and then exit.  This usage method will
include a list of supported ACL types and can be used to determine if
optional ACL methods were compiled into a given B<remctld> build.

=item B<-k> I<keytab>

[2.8] Use I<keytab> as the keytab for server credentials rather than the
system default or the value of the KRB5_KTNAME environment variable.
Using B<-k> just sets the KRB5_KTNAME environment variable internally in
the process.

=item B<-m>

[2.8] Enable stand-alone mode.  B<remctld> will listen to its configured
port and fork a new child for each incoming connection.  By default, when
this option is used, B<remctld> also changes directory to F</>,
backgrounds itself, and closes standard input, output, and error.  To not
background, pass B<-F> as well.  To not close standard output and error
and continue using them for logging, pass B<-S> as well.

To determine the port, B<remctld> attempts to look up the C<remctl>
service in the local F</etc/services> file and uses the port defined
there.  If the C<remctl> service could not be found, it uses 4373, the
registered remctl port.

=item B<-P> I<file>

[2.0] When running in stand-alone mode (B<-m>), write the PID of
B<remctld> to I<file>.  This option is ignored unless B<-m> is also given.

=item B<-p> I<port>

[1.0] When running in stand-alone mode, listen on port I<port> rather than
the default.  This option does nothing unless used with B<-m>.

This option is ignored if B<remctld> is passed already open sockets via
the systemd socket activation protocol.  In that case, the listening port
should be controlled via the systemd configuration.

=item B<-S>

[2.3] Rather than logging to syslog, log debug and routine connection
messages to standard output and error messages to standard error.  This
option is mostly useful for testing and debugging.

=item B<-s> I<service>

[1.0] Specifies which principal is used as the server identity for client
authentication.  The client must also use the same identity as the server
identity for authentication to succeed.  By default, B<remctld> accepts
any principal with a key in the default keytab file (which can be changed
with the B<-k> option).  This is normally the most desirable behavior.

=item B<-v>

[1.10] Print the version of B<remctld> and exit.

=item B<-Z>

[3.7] When B<remctld> is running in stand-alone mode, after it has set up
its network socket and is ready to answer requests, raise SIGSTOP.  This
signals to upstart, when using C<expect stop>, that the daemon is ready to
accept connections, and upstart will raise SIGCONT to allow B<remctld> to
continue.  This option is probably only useful when using upstart as the
init system.  Only makes sense in combination with B<-m>.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILE

The configuration file defines the allowed commands and specifies access
control information.  The configuration file format is lines of space- or
tab-separated strings, where each line is:

    command subcommand executable [option=value ...] acl [acl ...]

Each command consists of a command, a subcommand, and zero or more
arguments.  Each configuration line defines an acceptable command and
subcommand (or, if C<ALL> is used as mentioned below under I<command> and
I<subcommand>, a set of commands).  The first configuration line matching
the received command is used, so list more specific entries before more
general entries.

Blank lines and lines beginning with C<#> are ignored.  Lines can be
continued on the next line by ending them with a backslash (C<\>).  Be
aware that comments can be continued with a backslash as well.

As a special case, a line like:

    include file

will include I<file> as if its contents were pasted verbatim into the
configuration file at that point.  I<file> may be a directory, in which
case all files whose names do not contain a period found in that directory
will be included (in no particular order).  I<file> should be a fully
qualified path.

The meaning of the fields on each configuration line are:

=over 4

=item I<command>

The command being issued or the special keyword C<ALL>.  Normally, related
commands (such as all commands for managing a particular service) are
grouped together as subcommands under one command.

If the keyword C<ALL> is used instead of a specific subcommand, this line
matches all commands with the given subcommand (so C<ALL ALL> matches any
command) and can be used to dispatch all commands to the same executable
with the same ACLs.  Since the first matching entry is used, list entries
for specific commands first (if any) and then the C<ALL> catch-all.

Note that while the subcommand is passed to the executable as a
command-line option, the command is not.  The command is available to the
executable in the environment variable REMCTL_COMMAND (see L<ENVIRONMENT>
below).

The command C<help> is handled specially if no such command is defined in
the configuration file.  See below under the C<help> and C<summary>
options.

=item I<subcommand>

The subcommand within the command being requested, such as C<release> for
the release function of the AFS volume backend, or one of the special
keywords C<ALL> or C<EMPTY>.

If the keyword C<ALL> is used instead of a specific subcommand, this line
matches all subcommands with the given command and can be used to dispatch
all subcommands under that command to the same executable with the same
ACLs.  Since the first matching entry is used, list entries for specific
services first (if any) and then the C<ALL> catch-all.

If the keyword C<EMPTY> is used instead of a specific subcommand, this
line matches only commands where no subcommand was given.

The subcommand is always passed as the first argument to the executable
program that is listed for that service unless no subcommand was given.

=item I<executable>

The full path to the command executable to run for this command and
subcommand combination.  (See examples below.)

=item I<option>=I<value>

An option setting that applies to this command.  Supported option
settings, annotated with the version at which that option was added in its
current form, are:

=over 4

=item help=I<arg>

[3.2] Specifies the argument for this command that will print help for a
particular subcommand to standard output.

If remctld receives the command C<help> with one or two arguments, and no
C<help> command is defined in the configuration file, the server will take
the command arguments as a command and subcommand.  It will then look
through the configuration for a configuration line matching that command
and subcommand with a C<help> option set.  If one is found and the user is
authorized to run that command, the server will run the specified
I<executable> with the argument I<arg> and second and optional third
arguments taken from the arguments to the C<help> command, sending the
output back to the user.

This permits a standard interface to get additional help for a particular
remctl command.  Also see the C<summary> option.

=item logmask=I<n>[,...]

[1.4] Limit logging of command arguments.  Any argument listed in the
logmask list will have its value logged as "**MASKED**".  This is to avoid
logging the arguments of commands that take private information such as
passwords.  The logmask list should contain argument numbers separated by
commas, with the I<subcommand> considered argument 1.  The I<command>
argument cannot be masked.

For example, if the command is C<admin passwd I<username> I<password>>,
then you'd want to set logmask to C<3>, so the password argument gets
logged as C<**MASKED**>.  If the command is C<user passwd I<username>
I<old-password> I<new-password>>, you'd want to set logmask to C<3,4>.

=item stdin=(I<n> | C<last>)

[2.14] Specifies that the I<n>th or last argument to the command be passed
on standard input instead of on the command line.  The value of this
option must either be the number of argument to pass on standard input
(with the I<subcommand> considered argument 1) or the special value
C<last>, which indicates that the final argument (no matter how many there
are) be passed on standard input.

The I<command> cannot be passed on standard input, so I<n> must be at
least C<1>.  If this option is set to C<last> and no arguments are given
except the I<command> and possibly the I<subcommand>, nothing will be
passed on standard input.

This option is used primarily for passing large amounts of data that may
not fit on the command line or data that contains NUL characters.  It can
also be used for arguments like passwords that shouldn't be exposed on the
command line.  Only at most one argument may be passed on standard input
to the command.  Be aware that even if the I<subcommand> is the designated
argument to pass on standard input (C<stdin=1>), the I<subcommand> may not
contain NUL characters.

=item sudo=(I<username> | #I<uid>)

[3.12] Run this command as the specified user using B<sudo>.  This is
exactly equivalent to prepending C<sudo -u I<username> --> to the command
before running it.  The path to B<sudo> is determined when B<remctld> is
built.

The I<user> option is simpler and easier if B<remctld> is running as root.
However, it may be desirable in some configurations to run B<remctld> as a
non-root user, and B<remctl-shell> (which shares the same configuration
files) usually runs as a non-root user.  In those cases, this option can
be used to use B<sudo> to switch users before running the command.

Since the argument is passed verbatim to B<sudo>'s B<-u> option, you can
specify a numeric UID by prepending it with C<#>.

=item summary=I<arg>

[3.13] Specifies the argument for this command that will print a usage
summary to standard output.

If remctld receives the command C<help> with no arguments, and no C<help>
command is defined in the configuration file, the server will look through
the configuration for any command with a C<summary> option set.  If this
option is set, and the user is authorized to run the command, the server
will run the specified I<executable> with the argument I<arg>, sending the
output back to the user.  It will do this for every command in the
configuration that meets the above criteria.

This allows display of a summary of available commands to the user based
on which commands that user is authorized to run.  It's a lightweight form
of service discovery.  Also see the C<help> option.

=item user=(I<username> | I<uid>)

[3.1] Run this command as the specified user, which can be given as either
a username or as a UID.  Even if given as a UID, the user must be found in
the user database (searched via getpwuid(3)).  B<remctld> will run the
command as the specified user, including that user's primary and
supplemental groups.

=back

=item I<acl>

One or more entries of the form [I<method>:]I<data>, where I<method>
specifies an access control method to be used, and I<data> contains
parameters whose meaning depends on the method.  If the method is omitted,
the data is processed as described for the C<file> method.

If I<method> is omitted, I<acl> must either begin with C</> or must not
contain C<=>.  Otherwise, it will be parsed as an option instead.  If
there is any ambiguity, prepend the I<method>.

As a special exception for backward compatibility, the ACL C<ANYUSER>
(case-sensitive) is treated as equivalent to C<anyuser:auth>.

Each entry is checked in order, and access is granted as soon as an entry
matches.  If no entry matches, access is denied.  The following methods
may supported; however, be aware that the availability of several ACL
types depends on whether B<remctld> was built with that support.  Each ACL
type is annotated with the version in which it was added.

=over 4

=item anyuser

[3.10] Permit access to any user.  This comes in two forms:

=over 4

=item anyuser:auth

Permit any authenticated user.  This means not only the local Kerberos
realm but also any realm with which there is a cross-realm trust
relationship.

=item anyuser:anonymous

Permit entirely anonymous users.  This means no authentication whatsoever
is required to run the command.  Any client with network access to the
server can run the command (using anonymous PKINIT), assuming that
anonymous service tickets are enabled for the local Kerberos realm.

=back

For backwards compatibility, the ACL C<ANYUSER> is treated as identical to
C<anyuser:auth>.  This was the only supported any-user ACL syntax prior to
remctl 3.10.

=item file

[2.13] The data is the full path of an ACL file or to a directory
containing ACL files.  Directories are handled as described for the
include directive in configuration files.  An ACL file contains one entry
per line, in the [I<method>:]I<data> form described above.  Entries are
handled exactly as if they had appeared in the configuration file except
that the default method is C<princ> instead of C<file>.  Blank lines and
lines beginning with C<#> are ignored in the ACL files.

For backward compatibility, a line like:

    include [<method>:]<data>

in an ACL file behaves exactly as if the C<include> directive had been
omitted, except that the default method is C<file>.  Thus, writing:

    include <path>

in an ACL file is the same as writing:

    file:<path>

and is handled identically to the include directive in configuration
files.

=item princ

[2.13] The data is the name of a Kerberos v5 principal which is to be
granted access, such as C<username@EXAMPLE.ORG>.

=item deny

[2.13] This method is used to selectively deny access.  The data is parsed
as a [I<method>:]I<data> and evaluated as described above, with the
default scheme being C<princ>.  If it matches, access is denied
immediately without examining any further entries.  Otherwise, processing
continues.

Remember that access is granted as soon as an entry matches.  For C<deny>
rules to be effective, they therefore must come before any ACLs they are
intended to override.  Be careful when using C<deny> when including a
directory of ACL files, since the files in that directory are read in an
undefined order (not in alphabetical order by filename).  It's best to
explicitly include the file containing C<deny> ACL rules first.

Note that C<deny> only denies access; it never grants it.  Thus, deny
alone does not grant access to anyone, and using deny on itself as in
C<deny:deny:foo> neither denies nor grants access to anyone.

=item gput

[2.13] This method is used to grant access based on the CMU GPUT (Global
Privileged User Table -- see gput(5)).  The data is either a GPUT role
name or a string of the form I<group>[I<xform>], where I<group> is a GPUT
role name and I<xform> is a GPUT transform string.  Access is granted if
the user is a member of the specified GPUT group, after applying either
the optional I<xform> or the default transform.

This method is supported only if B<remctld> was compiled with GPUT support
by using the C<--with-gput> configure option.

=item localgroup

[3.9] This method is used to grant or deny access based on membership in
local UNIX groups.  The data is taken to be a name of a local system
group.  The user principal is converted to a local user name
with krb5_aname_to_localname(3) and then compared to the members of the
given group.

For example, to allow access to the members of group C<goodguys>, use an
ACL of C<localgroup:goodguys> syntax.  To deny access to the members of
group C<badguys>, use C<deny:localgroup:badguys>.

krb5_aname_to_localname() follows local configuration rules to determine
how to convert Kerberos principal to local users.  If the realm of the
principal is not in a local realm and is not otherwise covered by one of
those rules, the principal will be unchanged, which will almost certainly
mean that it will not be a member of any local group and access will be
denied.

This method is supported only if B<remctld> was built with Kerberos
support and the getgrnam_r(3) library function was supported by the C
library when it was built.

=item pcre

[2.16] This method is used to grant or deny access based on
Perl-compatible regular expressions.  The data is taken to be a
Perl-compatible regular expression and matched against the user identity.
To deny access, use the C<deny:pcre:I<regex>> syntax.

This method is supported only if B<remctld> was compiled with PCRE support
by using the C<--with-pcre> configure option.

=item regex

[2.16] This method is used to grant or deny access based on POSIX extended
regular expressions.  The data is taken to be a POSIX extended regular
expression (like those used by B<egrep>) and matched against the user
identity.  To deny access, use the C<deny:regex:I<regex>> syntax.

This method is supported only if a library for POSIX-compatible regular
expressions was found when B<remctld> was built.

=back

To see the list of ACL types supported by a particular build of
B<remctld>, run C<remctld -h>.

The keyword ANYUSER may be used instead of the ACLs to allow access to all
users.  The user still needs to authenticate to B<remctld>; this only
affects authorization.  This can be used for backend programs that want to
check ACLs themselves and will retrieve the authenticated principal from
the REMOTE_USER environment variable.  Note that ANYUSER accepts B<any>
authenticated user, including cross-realm users from foreign Kerberos
realms.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

B<remctld> itself uses the following environment variables when run in
stand-alone mode (B<-m>):

=over 4

=item LISTEN_FDS

=item LISTEN_PID

If these environment variables are set, B<remctld> will expect to be
provided its listening sockets via the systemd socket activation protocol
and will not attempt to bind its own sockets.  For more details on the
protocol, see L<daemon(7)> and L<sd_listen_fds(3)>.

=item NOTIFY_SOCKET

If this environment variable is set, B<remctld> will notify the socket
named in this variable when it is ready to accept incoming packets using
the systemd status notification protocol.  For more details, see
L<daemon(7)> and L<sd_notify(3)>.

Note that using socket activation is recommended when running under
systemd in stand-alone mode, and status notification is not necessary or
useful when using socket activation.

=back

When running in stand-alone mode, these environment variables will be
cleared by B<remctld> before running any commands.

The following environment variables will be set for any commands run via
B<remctld> (annotated with the version at which they were added):

=over 4

=item REMCTL_COMMAND

[2.16] The command string that caused this command to be run.  This
variable will contain only the command, not the subcommand or any
additional arguments (which are passed as command arguments).

=item REMOTE_ADDR

[2.1] The IP address of the remote host.  This may be IPv4 or IPv6.

=item REMOTE_EXPIRES

[3.10] The time (in seconds since UNIX epoch) when the authenticated
remote session will expire.  This will normally be the expiration time of
the Kerberos ticket used to authenticate to the server.

=item REMOTE_HOST

[2.1] The hostname of the remote host, if it was available.  If reverse
name resolution failed, this environment variable will not be set.

This is determined via a simple reverse DNS lookup and should be
considered under the control of the client.  remctl commands should treat
it with skepticism and not use it for anything other than logging
purposes.

=item REMOTE_USER

=item REMUSER

[1.0 for REMUSER, 2.1 for REMOTE_USER] Set to the Kerberos principal of
the authenticated client.

=back

If the B<-k> flag is used, B<remctld> will also set KRB5_KTNAME to the
provided keytab path.  This is primarily for communication with the
GSS-API library, but this setting will also be inherited by any commands
run by B<remctld>.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Typically B<remctld> is to be started as follows, where "hostname" is the
machine where remctld will run, and 4373 is the port:

    tcpserver hostname 4373 remctld

The equivalent line for F</etc/inetd.conf> is:

    4373 stream tcp nowait root /usr/sbin/tcpd /usr/sbin/remctld

or:

    remctl stream tcp nowait root /usr/sbin/tcpd /usr/sbin/remctld

if the C<remctl> service is listed in your F</etc/services> file.

To start B<remctld> in stand-alone mode instead, run:

    remctld -m

To start B<remctld> in stand-alone mode in the foreground, use:

    remctld -F -m

This is a typical invocation with systemd using socket activation.  For
upstart (with C<expect stop>), use:

    remctld -F -m -Z

Example configuration file:

 # Comments can be used like this.
 accounts create /usr/local/bin/doaccount  /etc/acl/group1 \
     /etc/acl/group2
 accounts delete /usr/local/bin/doaccount  /etc/acl/group3
 accounts view   /usr/local/bin/doaccount  ANYUSER
 accounts passwd /usr/local/bin/dopasswd   logmask=3 /etc/acl/group1
 printing ALL    /usr/local/bin/printthing /etc/acl/group2 

The commands C<accounts create>, C<accounts delete>, and so forth will all
be passed to /usr/local/bin/doaccount with the first argument being the
specific subcommand, with the exception of C<accounts passwd>.  That
command will be passed to /usr/local/bin/dopasswd instead, but it will
still get C<passwd> as its first argument.  The third argument to
C<accounts passwd> (presumably the password) will not be logged to syslog.
All commands starting with C<printing> will be passed to
/usr/local/bin/printthing.

Example ACL file:

    # This is a comment.
    deny:baduser@EXAMPLE.ORG
    file:/etc/remctl/acl/admins
    principal:service/admin@EXAMPLE.ORG
    service/other@EXAMPLE.ORG

This ACL file will reject C<baduser@EXAMPLE.ORG> even if that user would
have been allowed by one of the other ACL rules.  It will then grant
access according to the ACL entries in F</etc/remctl/acl/admins> and the
specific principals C<service/admin@EXAMPLE.ORG> and
C<service/other@EXAMPLE.ORG>.  The last line takes advantage of the
default ACL method of C<principal> when processing an ACL file.

=head1 COMPATIBILITY

The version at which various command-line and configuration options and
ACL methods were added to B<remctld> are noted in their descriptions.
Below is the version information for more general features, in reverse
order of when the feature was added.

Support for the systemd readiness protocol and socket activation,
including honoring the environment variables LISTEN_FDS, LISTEN_PID, and
NOTIFY_SOCKET, was added in version 3.7.

Special handling of the C<help> and C<summary> commands was added in
version 3.2.

Support for the C<ALL> keyword in the command field of the configuration
file was added in version 2.15.  (It has always been supported in the
subcommand field.)

Support for the C<EMPTY> keyword in the subcommand field of the
configuration file was added in version 2.15.

Support for ACL schemes and the I<method>:I<data> syntax was added in
remctl 2.13.  Prior versions of B<remctld> expected only files in the main
B<remctld> configuration file, and only principals or lines starting with
C<include> in those files, without any I<method>: prefixes.

The default listening port with the B<-m> option was changed to the
IANA-registered port of 4373 in version 2.11.

Support for IPv6 addresses in the REMOTE_ADDR environment variable was
added in version 2.4.

B<remctld> used to set the environment variable SCPRINCIPAL when running
commands, for (partial) backward compatibility with B<sysctld>, but
stopped doing so in version 2.1.

C<include> directives in ACL files were added in version 1.11.  C<include>
directives in configuration files were added in version 1.8.

=head1 CAVEATS

When using Heimdal with triple-DES keys and talking to old clients that
only speak version one of the remctl protocol, B<remctld> may have
problems with MIC verification.  This doesn't affect new clients and
servers since the version two protocol doesn't use MICs.  If you are using
Heimdal and run into MIC verification problems, see the COMPATIBILITY
section of gssapi(3).

B<remctld> does not itself impose any limits on the number of child
processes or other system resources.  You may want to set resource limits
in your inetd server or with B<ulimit> when running it as a standalone
daemon or under B<tcpserver>.

Command arguments may not contain NUL characters and must be shorter than
the operating system limit on the length of a command line since they're
passed to the command as command-line arguments.  The exception is an
argument passed via standard input using the C<stdin=> option in the
configuration file.  At most one argument may be passed that way.

=head1 NOTES

The remctl port number, 4373, was derived by tracing the diagonals of a
QWERTY keyboard up from the letters C<remc> to the number row.

=head1 AUTHOR

B<remctld> was originally written by Anton Ushakov.  Updates and current
maintenance are done by Russ Allbery <eagle@eyrie.org>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright 2002-2012, 2014 The Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford
Junior University

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification, are
permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and
this notice are preserved.  This file is offered as-is, without any
warranty.

SPDX-License-Identifier: FSFAP
  
=head1 SEE ALSO

remctl(1), syslog(3), tcpserver(1)

The current version of this program is available from its web page at
L<https://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/remctl/>.

=cut
